.Dd December 12, 2021
.Dt OMICRON1 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm omicron1
.Nd zone brand for running Omicron components
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
brand uses the
.Xr brands 5
framework to provide an environment in which to run Omicron components within
the Oxide Helios ramdisk image.
Each zone is created from the combination of the libraries and executables on
the running system, a baseline archive of pristine configuration files, and an
optional set of image archives provided at install time.
.Pp
This brand is intended for use in a ramdisk system where zones are not
persistent; they are recreated from images as needed each time the system
boots.
If persistent data is required, such as for a database server, the zone should
be provided with a delegated ZFS dataset and the application should be
configured to store its data within that dataset.
See
.Sx "DELEGATING A DATASET" .
.Sh BASELINE ARCHIVES
.Ss Production Systems
In production systems the baseline archive will be generated against the
ramdisk contents at build time and shipped as a file in the ramdisk itself.
This work is not yet complete.
.Ss Development Systems
For development purposes, a baseline archive can be generated against the
running system.
An SMF service,
.Sy svc:/system/omicron/baseline:default ,
is provided in the
.Sy pkg:/system/zones/brand/omicron1/tools
package, and will generate a baseline archive at boot and store it in
.Pa /var/run/brand/omicron
where the brand will look for it when installing a zone with
.Xr zoneadm 1M .
.Pp
The baseline generator makes use of
.Xr pkg 5
to assemble the contents of the zone root file system into an archive that can
be unpacked for each install.
Once the archive is generated, whether on the development system or in the
ramdisk, zones can be installed without further interaction with the packaging
system.
Any time
.Xr pkg 1
is used to update a development system, the contents of any previously
installed zones is likely invalid and they will need to be uninstalled and
reinstalled.
See
.Sx "LIMITATIONS" .
.Sh IMAGE ARCHIVES
An image archive is a gzip-compressed tar file with a specific layout.
The first file in the archive should be a file with the name
.Pa oxide.json
and the following contents:
.Bd -literal -offset DS
{"v":"1","t":"layer"}
.Ed
.Pp
This metadata is used by the brand to identify the type of image so that it may
be unpacked correctly.
.Pp
Files to be unpacked into the zone root must be stored within the archive under
a directory called
.Pa root .
A minimal image might contain very few files; e.g.,
.Bd -literal -offset DS
$ tar tfz /tmp/someimage.tar.gz
oxide.json
root/
root/var/svc/manifest/site/program1.xml
root/var/svc/manifest/site/program2.xml
root/var/svc/profile/site.xml
root/usr/lib/program1
root/usr/lib/program2
.Ed
.Sh CONFIGURATION
Zones using the
.Nm
brand must have an exclusive IP stack.
If networking in the zone is required, create a VNIC with
.Xr dladm 1M
.Po
e.g.,
.Ar testzone0
below
.Pc
and pass it in the zone configuration.
There is presently no mechanism for automated IP configuration from zone
properties, though enabling the
.Sy svc:/network/physical:nwam
service within the zone will make a best effort attempt at IPv4 and IPv6
automated configuration.
.Bd -literal -offset DS
create
set brand=omicron1
set zonepath=/zones/testzone
set autoboot=false
set ip-type=exclusive
add net
    set physical=testzone0
end
.Ed
.Sh INSTALLATION
At zone install time, the
.Nm
brand unpacks the baseline archive into the zone root to establish a basic
Helios environment inside the zone.
Additional files may optionally be layered on top of the base system by
providing them as arguments to
.Xr zoneadm 1M
when installing the zone:
.Bd -literal -offset DS
# zoneadm -z testzone0 install /tmp/someimage.tar.gz
A ZFS file system has been created for this zone.
INFO: omicron: installing zone testzone @ "/zones/testzone"...
INFO: omicron: replicating /usr tree...
INFO: omicron: replicating /lib tree...
INFO: omicron: replicating /sbin tree...
INFO: omicron: pruning SMF manifests...
INFO: omicron: pruning global-only files...
INFO: omicron: unpacking baseline archive...
INFO: omicron: unpacking image "/tmp/someimage.tar.gz"...
INFO: omicron: install complete, probably!
.Ed
.Pp
Note that, as per
.Sx "LIMITATIONS" ,
for correct operation each
.Nm
zone must be uninstalled and reinstalled any time a development system is
updated, such as with
.Xr pkg 1 .
In a production ramdisk system, this will effectively happen automatically as
all zone state is discarded each time the system reboots.
.Sh DELEGATING A DATASET
One can create a delegated dataset that will automatically mount at
.Pa /data
within the zone as follows:
.Bd -literal -offset DS
# zfs create -o canmount=noauto rpool/delegated/testzone
# zfs set mountpoint=/data rpool/delegated/testzone
# zfs set zoned=on rpool/delegated/testzone
# zfs set canmount=on rpool/delegated/testzone
.Ed
.Pp
Once this dataset has been created, it can be delegated to the zone via
.Xr zonecfg 1M :
.Bd -literal -offset DS
# zonecfg -z testzone
zonecfg:testzone> add dataset
zonecfg:testzone:dataset> set name=rpool/delegated/testzone
zonecfg:testzone:dataset> end
zonecfg:testzone> commit
.Ed
.Pp
The dataset will then be mounted at
.Pa /data
next time the zone boots.
Note that the delegated dataset can also be added during initial zone
configuration, and does not need to be added as a second step.
.Sh LIMITATIONS
Various components in the operating system share
.Sy Private
interfaces with one another; e.g.,
the system call interface used by
.Pa libc.so.1
and the kernel are subject to change without notice.
To ensure correct operation such components must always be built together, and
installed or updated in lock step.
.Pp
During zone installation, the
.Nm
brand draws baseline files, which include such components with
.Sy Private
interfaces, from two sources:
.Bl -dash
.It
Executable and library files in
.Pa /usr ,
.Pa /lib ,
and
.Pa /sbin ,
which are copied or symlinked from their source locations on the running system.
.It
Seed configuration and data files, such as those in
.Pa /etc
and
.Pa /var ,
which are unpacked from the baseline archive.
.El
.Pp
The copying and symlinking of contents from trees like
.Pa /usr
represents a compromise:
.Bl -dash
.It
It allows us to modify those trees by layering on additional files from images,
which a read-only
.Xr lofs 7FS
mount would not.
A more complete solution for the future, which would require more
engineering effort, would be to develop a union or layered file system.
.It
It requires us to reinstall the zone any time the contents of
.Pa /usr ,
.Pa /lib ,
or
.Pa /sbin ,
change; i.e., any time the operating system is updated.
This is only a problem on development machines, as production ramdisks are
sealed at build time and zones will be recreated each time the machine boots.
.El
.Pp
In short: use
.Xr zoneadm 1M
to uninstall and reinstall your
.Nm
brand zones after updating with
.Xr pkg 1
and rebooting.
.Sh INTERFACE STABILITY
During early development the brand will continue to evolve, and is thus
.Sy Uncommitted .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pkg 1 ,
.Xr dladm 1M ,
.Xr zfs 1M ,
.Xr zoneadm 1M ,
.Xr zonecfg 1M ,
.Xr brands 5 ,
.Xr pkg 5 ,
.Xr zones 5 ,
.Xr lofs 7FS
